README.md, before:

Expression
==========
Calculate RNA to DNA ratio to quantify expression and plot the values along with the fusion information found

Allison MacLeay, M.S.

Zongli Zheng, Ph.D.

Richard Schmidt, M.D., Ph.D.

![alt-text](https://github.com/alliemacleay/expression/blob/master/target_creation.png "Exon and intron targets")

Choose targets at the exon closest to the primer 3 bases before the end of the exon and 3 bases after into to intron to measure rna coverage and dna coverage.

Required files
--------------
* Indexed BAM files
* primer locations - targets.gtf
* exome locations - gencodeV24lift37.bed
* Fusion information file

Some of the file names are hardcoded so you will have to go into mk_header.sh and expression.R to edit the hardcoded names.

Steps
-----
1. Create a target file from the targets file and an exon reference.
  * `python multicov_bed_file_generator.py --exome-file gencodeV24lift37.bed --primer-bed targets.gtf --output-file expression.bed`
2. Copy all bams and their index files to a directory
3. Make a file with the bam paths
  * `ls bam_dir > bam_files.txt`
4. Put all bam paths on one line
  * `sed -e 's/\n/ /g' bam_files.txt > bam_files.oneline.txt`
5. Calculate coverage of all targets for all samples (single quote is a backtick)
  * `bedtools multicov -bams 'cat bam_files.oneline.txt' -bed expression.bed > coverage.txt`
6. Fix the coverage file so that it has a header
  * `./mk_header.sh`
7. Run analysis
  * `expression_allie.R`
  
Output
--------
RNA_to_DNA_.raw.full.pdf  - box plot with all genes and labeled fusions

RNA_to_DNA_\<gene\>.raw.pdf – box plot by gene with labeled fusions

RNA_to_DNA_\<gene\>_exp.pdf – scatter plot with log10 ratio of rna to dna expression with labeled fusions

RNA_to_DNA_normalized_by_housekeeping.full.pdf – box plot with all genes and labeled fusions normalized by MSMB, ERG, and TFEB

RNA_to_DNA_normalized_by_housekeeping.pdf – subset of genes (ALK, BRD4, and ROS1)

RNA_normalized_by_housekeeping.full.pdf – RNA expression normalized by MSMB, ERG, and TFEB

RNA_normalized_by_housekeeping_subset.pdf - subset of genes (ALK, BRD4, and ROS1) RNA expression

Commit message:

Adding plots for normalized expression by gene

README.md, after:

Expression
==========
Calculate RNA to DNA ratio to quantify expression and plot the values along with the fusion information found

Allison MacLeay, M.S.

Zongli Zheng, Ph.D.

Richard Schmidt, M.D., Ph.D.

![alt-text](https://github.com/alliemacleay/expression/blob/master/target_creation.png "Exon and intron targets")

Choose targets at the exon closest to the primer 3 bases before the end of the exon and 3 bases after into to intron to measure rna coverage and dna coverage.

Required files
--------------
* Indexed BAM files
* primer locations - targets.gtf
* exome locations - gencodeV24lift37.bed
* Fusion information file

Some of the file names are hardcoded so you will have to go into mk_header.sh and expression.R to edit the hardcoded names.

Steps
-----
1. Create a target file from the targets file and an exon reference.
  * `python multicov_bed_file_generator.py --exome-file gencodeV24lift37.bed --primer-bed targets.gtf --output-file expression.bed`
2. Copy all bams and their index files to a directory
3. Make a file with the bam paths
  * `ls bam_dir > bam_files.txt`
4. Put all bam paths on one line
  * `sed -e 's/\n/ /g' bam_files.txt > bam_files.oneline.txt`
5. Calculate coverage of all targets for all samples (single quote is a backtick)
  * `bedtools multicov -bams 'cat bam_files.oneline.txt' -bed expression.bed > coverage.txt`
6. Fix the coverage file so that it has a header
  * `./mk_header.sh`
7. Run analysis
  * `expression_allie.R`


Methods
--------
The bed file with the targets for the panel is used in conjunction with the coordinates of all exons in the genome pulled from the UCSC genome browser (gencodeV24lift37.bed) to create a new bed file that has targets 3 bases before the exon-intron junction in the exon and 3 bases after in the intron.  The coverage at these locations is used to calculate the amount of DNA and RNA in the exon and DNA only in the intron.  The R script provided uses these values to calculate the expression ratio.  It also takes in a fusion data file and parses it to flag the samples with known fusions.  The boxplots show the log10 ratios of expression with the known fusions involving each gene labeled.  For each gene the ratios are plotted and the fusion is labeled.  Normalization is done by subsetting the data by 3 genes, finding the median expression ratio for each sample in these genes, and dividing the raw expression value by the sample median.  The plots are created for these normalized values.  The same method is applied to the raw RNA expression values. 
  
Output
--------
RNA_to_DNA_.raw.full.pdf  - box plot with all genes and labeled fusions

RNA_to_DNA_\<gene\>.raw.pdf – box plot by gene with labeled fusions

RNA_to_DNA_\<gene\>_exp.pdf – scatter plot with log10 ratio of rna to dna expression with labeled fusions

RNA_to_DNA_normalized_by_housekeeping.full.pdf – box plot with all genes and labeled fusions normalized by MSMB, ERG, and TFEB

RNA_to_DNA_normalized_by_housekeeping.pdf – subset of genes (ALK, BRD4, and ROS1)

RNA_normalized_by_housekeeping.full.pdf – RNA expression normalized by MSMB, ERG, and TFEB

RNA_normalized_by_housekeeping_subset.pdf - subset of genes (ALK, BRD4, and ROS1) RNA expression
